4.5.3.1 Size limits and minimums

   There are several objects that have required minimum/maximum sizes.
   Every implementation MUST be able to receive objects of at least
   these sizes.  Objects larger than these sizes SHOULD be avoided when
   possible.  However, some Internet mail constructs such as encoded
   X.400 addresses [16] will often require larger objects: clients MAY
   attempt to transmit these, but MUST be prepared for a server to
   reject them if they cannot be handled by it.  To the maximum extent
   possible, implementation techniques which impose no limits on the
   length of these objects should be used.

   local-part
      The maximum total length of a user name or other local-part is 64
      characters.




Klensin                     Standards Track                    [Page 54]

RFC 2821             Simple Mail Transfer Protocol            April 2001


   domain
      The maximum total length of a domain name or number is 255
      characters.

   path
      The maximum total length of a reverse-path or forward-path is 256
      characters (including the punctuation and element separators).

   command line
      The maximum total length of a command line including the command
      word and the <CRLF> is 512 characters.  SMTP extensions may be
      used to increase this limit.

   reply line
      The maximum total length of a reply line including the reply code
      and the <CRLF> is 512 characters.  More information may be
      conveyed through multiple-line replies.

   text line
      The maximum total length of a text line including the <CRLF> is
      1000 characters (not counting the leading dot duplicated for
      transparency).  This number may be increased by the use of SMTP
      Service Extensions.

   message content
      The maximum total length of a message content (including any
      message headers as well as the message body) MUST BE at least 64K
      octets.  Since the introduction of Internet standards for
      multimedia mail [12], message lengths on the Internet have grown
      dramatically, and message size restrictions should be avoided if
      at all possible.  SMTP server systems that must impose
      restrictions SHOULD implement the "SIZE" service extension [18],
      and SMTP client systems that will send large messages SHOULD
      utilize it when possible.

   recipients buffer
      The minimum total number of recipients that must be buffered is
      100 recipients.  Rejection of messages (for excessive recipients)
      with fewer than 100 RCPT commands is a violation of this
      specification.  The general principle that relaying SMTP servers
      MUST NOT, and delivery SMTP servers SHOULD NOT, perform validation
      tests on message headers suggests that rejecting a message based
      on the total number of recipients shown in header fields is to be
      discouraged.  A server which imposes a limit on the number of
      recipients MUST behave in an orderly fashion,  such as to reject
      additional addresses over its limit rather than silently
      discarding addresses previously accepted.  A client that needs to




Klensin                     Standards Track                    [Page 55]

RFC 2821             Simple Mail Transfer Protocol            April 2001


      deliver a message containing over 100 RCPT commands SHOULD be
      prepared to transmit in 100-recipient "chunks" if the server
      declines to accept more than 100 recipients in a single message.

   Errors due to exceeding these limits may be reported by using the
   reply codes.  Some examples of reply codes are:

      500 Line too long.
   or
      501 Path too long
   or
      452 Too many recipients  (see below)
   or
      552 Too much mail data.

   RFC 821 [30] incorrectly listed the error where an SMTP server
   exhausts its implementation limit on the number of RCPT commands
   ("too many recipients") as having reply code 552.  The correct reply
   code for this condition is 452.  Clients SHOULD treat a 552 code in
   this case as a temporary, rather than permanent, failure so the logic
   below works.

   When a conforming SMTP server encounters this condition, it has at
   least 100 successful RCPT commands in its recipients buffer.  If the
   server is able to accept the message, then at least these 100
   addresses will be removed from the SMTP client's queue.  When the
   client attempts retransmission of those addresses which received 452
   responses, at least 100 of these will be able to fit in the SMTP
   server's recipients buffer.  Each retransmission attempt which is
   able to deliver anything will be able to dispose of at least 100 of
   these recipients.

   If an SMTP server has an implementation limit on the number of RCPT
   commands and this limit is exhausted, it MUST use a response code of
   452 (but the client SHOULD also be prepared for a 552, as noted
   above).  If the server has a configured site-policy limitation on the
   number of RCPT commands, it MAY instead use a 5XX response code.
   This would be most appropriate if the policy limitation was intended
   to apply if the total recipient count for a particular message body
   were enforced even if that message body was sent in multiple mail
   transactions.

