4.5.3.2 Timeouts

   An SMTP client MUST provide a timeout mechanism.  It MUST use per-
   command timeouts rather than somehow trying to time the entire mail
   transaction.  Timeouts SHOULD be easily reconfigurable, preferably
   without recompiling the SMTP code.  To implement this, a timer is set



Klensin                     Standards Track                    [Page 56]

RFC 2821             Simple Mail Transfer Protocol            April 2001


   for each SMTP command and for each buffer of the data transfer.  The
   latter means that the overall timeout is inherently proportional to
   the size of the message.

   Based on extensive experience with busy mail-relay hosts, the minimum
   per-command timeout values SHOULD be as follows:

   Initial 220 Message: 5 minutes
      An SMTP client process needs to distinguish between a failed TCP
      connection and a delay in receiving the initial 220 greeting
      message.  Many SMTP servers accept a TCP connection but delay
      delivery of the 220 message until their system load permits more
      mail to be processed.

   MAIL Command: 5 minutes

   RCPT Command: 5 minutes
      A longer timeout is required if processing of mailing lists and
      aliases is not deferred until after the message was accepted.

   DATA Initiation: 2 minutes
      This is while awaiting the "354 Start Input" reply to a DATA
      command.

   Data Block: 3 minutes
      This is while awaiting the completion of each TCP SEND call
      transmitting a chunk of data.

   DATA Termination: 10 minutes.
      This is while awaiting the "250 OK" reply.  When the receiver gets
      the final period terminating the message data, it typically
      performs processing to deliver the message to a user mailbox.  A
      spurious timeout at this point would be very wasteful and would
      typically result in delivery of multiple copies of the message,
      since it has been successfully sent and the server has accepted
      responsibility for delivery.  See section 6.1 for additional
      discussion.

   An SMTP server SHOULD have a timeout of at least 5 minutes while it
   is awaiting the next command from the sender.

